Update draft-irtf-pearg-ip-address-privacy-considerations.md (#33)
ShivanKaul/draft-ip-address-privacy: draft-irtf-pearg-ip-address-privacy-considerations.md

  WEBAUTHN:
    title: "Web Authentication: An API for accessing Public Key Credentials Level 2"
    target: https://www.w3.org/TR/webauthn-2/
  GDPR:
    title: General Data Protection Regulation

>     target: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Data_Protection_Regulation   

Reviewer: I think it would be better to cite https://gdpr.eu/tag/gdpr/ or another official source and/or a source with the full text

  APPI:
    title: Japan - Data Protection Overview
    target: https://www.dataguidance.com/notes/japan-data-protection-overview  
  LGPD:
    title: General Personal Data Protection Law (Brazil)
    target: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Personal_Data_Protection_Law    
  PIPL:
    title: Personal Information Protection Law of the People's Republic of China

>     target: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personal_Information_Protection_Law_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China

Reviewer: I think it would be better to cite https://digichina.stanford.edu/work/translation-personal-information-protection-law-of-the-peoples-republic-of-china-effective-nov-1-2021/ or another official source and/or a source with the full text

## IP Privacy Protection and Law

Various countries, in the last decade, have adopted, or updated, laws that aim at protecting citizens privacy, which includes IP addresses.  
Very often, these laws are actually part of bigger regulations aiming
at protecting users' Personal Identifiable Information (PII) in a
broad sense.
{{table:laws}} provides a snapshot of relevant existing regulations.

> |Country|Law|IP Address is PII|Consent|

Reviewer: The Consent column should likely be omitted as all locals seem to provide for some explicit requirement while also providing allowances for implicit consent in emergencies or other situations. This area of the law seems to difficult to summarize in a single column and I think it could be followup work

|-------|---|----------|-------|
|Brazil |{{LGPD}} - Lei General de Protecao de Dados Pessoals |Yes (not explicitly stated)|Explicit|
|Canada |{{PIPEDA}} - Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act|Yes |Implicit|
|China |{{PIPL}} - Personal Information Protection Law |Yes      |Explicit|
|European Union |{{GDPR}} - General Data Protection Regulation |Yes      |Explicit|
|Japan |{{APPI}} - Act of Protection of Personal Information |Yes (including anonymized data)|Explicit|
{: #table:laws title="Relevant privacy laws and regulations"}

> In summary, all of the major laws recognizes IP addresses as personal identification information. Brazil does not mention IP addresses explicitly but includes them de facto. Japan does protect even anonymized data. All require an explicit action from the user to grant permission to use PII, except for Canada that allows implicit consent. USA does not have a general federal law, but sector-specific laws pertaining to privacy that would be too difficult to summarize. USA does not consider IP addresses as personally identifiable information {{IP2009}}.

Reviewer: It would be better to cite the [CCPA](https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa) rather than the [decision in W.D. Wash](https://www.huntonprivacyblog.com/2009/07/10/washington-court-rules-that-ip-addresses-are-not-personally-identifiable-information/). That indicates to the reader they need to examine the rules state-by-state rather than expecting a consistent governing rule.

## IP Privacy Protection and Law

Various countries, in the last decade, have adopted, or updated, laws that aim at protecting citizens privacy, which includes IP addresses.  
Very often, these laws are actually part of bigger regulations aiming
at protecting users' Personal Identifiable Information (PII) in a
broad sense.
{{table:laws}} provides a snapshot of relevant existing regulations.

|Country|Law|IP Address is PII|Consent|
|-------|---|----------|-------|
|Brazil |{{LGPD}} - Lei General de Protecao de Dados Pessoals |Yes (not explicitly stated)|Explicit|
|Canada |{{PIPEDA}} - Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act|Yes |Implicit|
|China |{{PIPL}} - Personal Information Protection Law |Yes      |Explicit|
|European Union |{{GDPR}} - General Data Protection Regulation |Yes      |Explicit|
|Japan |{{APPI}} - Act of Protection of Personal Information |Yes (including anonymized data)|Explicit|

> |USA |  |No      | |

Reviewer 2: Since this table is summarizing laws, it seems odd to list a jurisdiction (USA) with no relevant law. I'd suggest dropping this row. It might be worth keeping the USA section of the deleted text as a footnote to note that the US has sector-specific laws pertaining to privacy that would be too difficult to summarize in this table.

{: #table:laws title="Relevant privacy laws and regulations"}

> Basically all of the major laws recognizes IP addresses as personal identification information. Brazil does not mention IP addresses explicitly but includes them de facto. Japan does protect even anonymized data. All require an explicit action from the user to grant permission to use PII, except for Canada that allows implicit consent. USA does not have a general federal law, and IP addresses are not considered personally identifiable information {{IP2009}}.

Reviewer 2: wording nit: Change "Basically" to "In summary"

> Basically all of the major laws recognizes IP addresses as personal identification information. Brazil does not mention IP addresses explicitly but includes them de facto. Japan does protect even anonymized data. All require an explicit action from the user to grant permission to use PII, except for Canada that allows implicit consent. USA does not have a general federal law, and IP addresses are not considered personally identifiable information {{IP2009}}.

Reviewer 2: wording nit: Change "Basically" to "In summary"

## IP Privacy Protection and Law

Various countries, in the last decade, have adopted, or updated, laws that aim at protecting citizens privacy, which includes IP addresses.  

> Very often, these laws are actually part of bigger regulations aiming
> at protecting users' Personal Identifiable Information (PII) in a
> broad sense.
> {{table:laws}} provides a snapshot of relevant existing regulations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Very often, these laws are actually part of larger regulatory frameworks aimed at protecting users' Personal Identifiable Information (PII) in a broad sense. {{table:laws}} provides a snapshot of relevant existing regulations.
```

> |Country|Law|IP Address is PII|General type of Consent|
> |-------|---|----------|-------|
> |Brazil |{{LGPD}} - Lei General de Protecao de Dados Pessoals |Yes (not explicitly stated)|Explicit|
> |Canada |{{PIPEDA}} - Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act|Yes |Implicit|
> |China |{{PIPL-C}}{{PIPL}} - Personal Information Protection Law |Yes      |Explicit|
> |European Union |{{GDPR}} - General Data Protection Regulation |Yes      |Explicit|
> |Japan |{{APPI}} - Act of Protection of Personal Information |Yes (including anonymized data)|Explicit|
> {: #table:laws title="Relevant privacy laws and regulations"}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Country|Law|IP Address is PII|
|-|-|-|
|Brazil |{{LGPD}} - Lei General de Protecao de Dados Pessoals |Yes (not explicitly stated)|
|Canada |{{PIPEDA}} - Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act|Yes |
|China |{{PIPL-C}}{{PIPL}} - Personal Information Protection Law |Yes|
|European Union |{{GDPR}} - General Data Protection Regulation |Yes|
|Japan |{{APPI}} - Act of Protection of Personal Information |Yes (including anonymized data)|
{: #table:laws title="Relevant privacy laws and regulations"}
```

> In summary, all of the major laws recognizes IP addresses as personal identification information. Brazil does not mention IP addresses explicitly but includes them de facto. Japan does protect even anonymized data. All require an explicit action from the user to grant permission to use PII, except for Canada that allows implicit consent. Note that all laws include exceptions on the type of consent, which, however are difficult to summarize. USA does not have a general federal law, but state sector-specific laws pertaining to privacy that would be too difficult to summarize (see {{CCPA}} as an example). Depending  on the state, IP addresses may not be considered as personally identifiable information {{IP2009}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of the major laws recognizes IP addresses as personal identification information. Most of these laws require explicit consent when they do require consent for use of IP Addresses, however Canada's regulation makes allowances for implicit consent.

The USA does not have a general federal law, but does have locale specific laws (see {{CCPA}} as an example). Depending on the locale, IP addresses may not be considered as personally identifiable information {{IP2009}}.
```

Author: My understanding is that you want to provide as few details as possible, I guess to avoid misinterpretations. Is that right? Hence the reason dropping the specific per-country comments and just keeping:

All of the major laws recognizes IP addresses as personal identification information. Most of these laws require explicit consent when they do require consent for use of IP Addresses, however Canada's regulation makes allowances for implicit consent.
The USA does not have a general federal law, but does have locale specific laws (see {{CCPA}} as an example). Depending on the locale, IP addresses may not be considered as personally identifiable information {{IP2009}}.

If my understanding is correct I am fine with the changes.

Reviewer 3: I agree with this suggested change. This entire topic is complicated by the fact that, based on my understanding, IP addresses are *not* inherently PII - they become PII within certain contexts (e.g., when there exists a sufficiently strong association between an address and a person). You mention this in relation to {{IP2009}}, but I believe this is true more generally, including under GDPR, as well. In any case, we should not make this document a legal analysis of laws around the world, a simple summary is sufficient. Thanks for creating it.

Author: Hi,
Not sure how to interpret your last comment. Do you agree with the last proposed text?
(copied again hereafter)

All of the major laws recognizes IP addresses as personal identification information. Most of these laws require explicit consent when they do require consent for use of IP Addresses, however Canada's regulation makes allowances for implicit consent.
The USA does not have a general federal law, but does have locale specific laws (see {{CCPA}} as an example). Depending on the locale, IP addresses may not be considered as personally identifiable information {{IP2009}}.

Ciao

L.

Reviewer 2: Apologies for the delay in replying. I think  a slight edit to the text you copied here would resolve the issue @sysrqb raised, could you edit "All of the major laws recognizes IP addresses as personal identification information" to be "All of the major laws recognizes IP addresses as personal identification information when there is sufficiently strong correlation between an address and a person or when combined with other information to create that correlation"
